My story: I had a freak, life threatening accident in school. I took one year to recover. However, reaching
back to the pre-accident level of fitness was very difficult. So I focused on getting my life in order. While
my peers stayed up late and played video games, I built good sleep habits, and went to bed early each
night. In a messy world of a college dorm, I made it a point to keep my room neat and tidy. These
improvements were minor, but they gave me a sense of control over my life. I started to feel confident
again. And this growing belief in myself rippled into the classroom as I improved my study habits and
managed to earn A’s during first year.
How this book will benefit you
To write a great book, you must first become the book. Naval Ravikant Entrepreneur and investor
In the book I will share a step-by-step plan for building better habits-not for days or weeks, but for a
lifetime. While science supports everything I have written, this book is not an academic research paper;
it’s an operating manual.
What I offer you is a synthesis of the best ideas smart people figured out a long time ago as well as the
most compelling discoveries scientists have made recently. My contribution, I hope is to find ideas that
matter most and connect them in a way that is highly actionable. Anything wise in these pages you should
credit to many experts who preceded me. Anything foolish, assume it my error.
Human behavior is continuously changing. But this book is about what doesn’t change. It’s about the
fundamentals of human behavior useful in business, family and life in general.
The Fundamentals: Why Tiny Changes Make a Big Difference
Chapter 1: The surprising power of atomic habits
British cycling teams for 100 years were mediocre, not winning any medals anywhere. Brailsford was
hired as coach. He put them on a strategy “the aggregation of marginal gains” which was the philosophy
of searching for tiny margin of improvement in everything you do. When you break down everything you
do and then improve it by 1 % you will get significant when you put them all together.
Just five years after new coach, British cycling team dominated Olympic Games, and many other world
titles.
Too often, we convince ourselves that massive success requires massive action. Improving 1 % isn’t
particularly notable or noticeable in the long run. If you get 1 % better each day for 1 year, you’ll end up
37 times better at the end of the year.
Habits are compound interest of self improvement. It has similar impact to that of shifting the route of an
airplane by just a few degrees. In a flight from LA to New York, you may reach Washington D.C instead.
What matters most is whether habits are putting you on a path toward success. You should be far more
concerned with your trajectory than your current results.
If you want to predict where you will end up in life, all you have to do is to follow the curve of tiny gains
and tiny losses, and see how your daily choices will compound to 10-20 years down the line.
Time magnifies the margin between success and failure. It will multiply whatever you feed it.
What progress is like?
Habits appear to make no difference until you cross a critical threshold and unlock a new level of
performance. This is called The Plateau of Latent potential. It is like geological pressure causing
earthquakes.
When nothing seems to help, I go and look at a stonecutter hammering away at his rock, perhaps a
hundred times without as much as a crack showing in it. Yet at the 101st blow it will split into two, and I
know it was not the last blow that did it-but all that had gone before.
Forget about Goals, Focus on Systems instead
I began to realize that my results had very little to do with the goals I set and nearly everything to do with
the systems I followed. Goals are about the results you want to achieve. Systems are about the processes
that lead to those results.
If you completely ignored goals and focused only on your system, would you still succeed? I think you
would. The only way to win is to get better every day. The score takes care of itself. It is ridiculous to
keep looking at the scoreboard all the time.
Goals are important in setting a direction, but systems are best for making progress.
Problem 1: Winners and losers have the same goals
Problem 2: Achieving goal is only a momentary change.
Problem 3: Goals restrict your happiness.
Problem 4: Goals are at odds with long-term progress.
Chapter 2: How Your Habits Shape Your Identity (Vice Versa)
Changing habits is challenging for two reasons. 1. We try to change the wrong thing. 2. We try to change
our habits the wrong way.
Three layers of behavior change
The first and outermost layer is outcomes/results.
The second one is changing your process. In this we change habits and systems
The third and innermost one is changing your identity. Here we change beliefs: world view, self-image.
Imagine two smokers trying to quit smoking. When offered a cigarette, one person says “No thanks, I’m
trying to quit.” He believes that he is a smoker who is trying something else. The other smoker’s response
is “No thanks, I’m not a smoker.” This person has changed identity from a smoker to a non smoker.
Behind every system of actions are a system of beliefs. This applies to individuals, organizations and
societies.
Behavior that is not congruent with the self will not last. You may want money, but if you identify with
someone who consumes more than he creates, then you will suffer. You may have a new goal, but you
haven’t changed who you are.
The more pride you have in a particular aspect of your identity, the more motivated you will be to
maintain the habits associated with it. If you are proud of your body, you will exercise.
True behavior change is identity change. Improvements are temporary until they become part of who you
are.
The goal is not to read a book, the goal is to become a reader.
The goal is not to run a marathon, the goal is be a runner.
The goal is not to learn an instrument, the goal is to become a musician.
You are simply acting like the type of person you already believe yourself to be. It is a double edged
sword.
When you have repeated a story to yourself for years, it is easy to slide into these mental grooves and
accept them as a fact.
The biggest barrier to positive change is identity conflict. Good habits can make rational sense, but if they
conflict with your identity, you will fail to put them into action.
Over the long run, however, the real reason you fail to stick with habits is that your self-image gets in the
way. Progress requires unlearning. Becoming the best version of yourself requires you to continuously
edit your beliefs, and to upgrade and expand your identity.
Where do the beliefs come from?
The two step process to changing your identity
Your identity emerges out of your habits. Every belief is learned and conditioned through experience.
The more you repeat a behavior, the more you reinforce the identity associated with that behavior.
Whatever your identity, you only believe it because you have proof of it. If you study regularly, you have
evidence that you are studious. If you go to gym even when it’s snowing, you have evidence that you are
committed to fitness. The more evidence you have for a belief, the more strongly you will believe it.
I didn’t start out as a writer. I became one through my habits.
Habits by virtue of their frequency are the most important in shaping your identity. This is gradual
evolution. We are continually undergoing microevolution of the self. Each habit is a suggestion.
Each habit not only gets results but also teaches you something far more important: to trust yourself.
New identities require new evidence. If nothing changes, nothing is going to change.
Two-step Process: Decide the person you want to be. Prove it to yourself through small wins.
Ask yourself, “Who is the type of person that could get the outcome I want?”For example, a reliable and
consistent person could write a book. So focus shifts from writing a book to becoming a person who is
consistent and reliable.
I am a kind of teacher who stands up for my students.
Habits shape identity, and identity shapes your habits. It’s a feedback loop, and a two-way-street.